(hub-deployment-guide:runbooks:phase3)=
# Phase 3: Hub setup

This assumes a cluster where the hub will be deployed to already exists

## Phase 3.1: Initial setup

### Definition of ready

The following lists the information that needs to be available to the engineer before this phase can start.

- Name of the hub
- Dask gateway?
- Splash image
- URL* (this will be used for both URL and funded_by)
- Authentication Mechanism
- Admin Users

### Outputs

At the end of Phase 3.1 both 2i2c engineers and the admin users mentioned can login to the hub.

The file assets that should have been generated and included in the PR should be:

```bash
```

```{tip}
When reviewing cluster setup PRs, make sure the files above are all present.
```

### Initial setup runbook

All of the following steps must be followed in order to consider phase 3.1 complete. Steps might contain references to other smaller, topic-specifc runbooks that are gathered together and listed in the order they should be carried on by an engineer.

1. Determine the **hub helm chart** that is needed.

   Use the info provided in the new hub GitHub issue for the `Dask gateway` section.
   If Dask gateway will be needed, then go for a `daskhub` helm chart, otherwise choose a `basehub`.

   Store the helm type under $HELM_CHART_TYPE env var:

   ```bash
   export $HELM_CHART_TYPE=type
   ```

   For more information about our hub helm charts and how to choose, see [](hub-helm-charts).

   ```{seealso}
   See [](/topic/infrastructure/config.md) for general information about hub helm chart configuration.
   ```

2. Determine the address of the file storage server that a hub on this cluster should use for connecting to it.

    `````{tab-set}
    ````{tab-item} AWS
    :sync: aws-key
    Get the address of the EFS server via terraform and store it as it will be required in a later step.

    ```bash
    terraform output nfs_server_dns
    ```
    ````

    ````{tab-item} Google Cloud
    :sync: gcp-key
    Get the address of the Google FileStore IP from the UI and store it as it will be required in a later step.
    ````

    ````{tab-item} Azure
    :sync: azure-key
    N/A
    ````
    `````

3. Create the relevant values.yaml file/s under the appropriate cluster directory.

   If the cluster will have multiple hubs, and chances are it will as there's a common 2i2c practice to always deploy a staging hub alongside a production one, then create two values.yaml files under the appropriate cluster directory.

   One file will hold the common hubs configuration and one will hold the specific hub configuration.

   ```bash
   export $CLUSTER_NAME=cluster-name;
   export $HUB_NAME=hub-name
   ```

   Make sure you are in the root of the infrastructure repository and run:

   ```bash
   touch ./config/clusters/$CLUSTER_NAME/$HUB_NAME.values.yaml;
   touch ./config/clusters/$CLUSTER_NAME/common.values.yaml
   ```

4. Run the deployer to configure the hub using the information available in this phase.

   The easiest way to add new configuration is to use the deployer to generate an initial config.

   You will be asked to input all the information needed for the commands to run successfully. Follow the instructions and using the information provided to you, fill in all the information.

   Run the deployer commands below to generate config for the specific hub configuration:
   ```bash
   deployer generate hub-asset main-values-file
   ```

   Run the deployer commands below to generate config for the common hubs configuration:
   ```bash
   deployer generate hub-asset main-values-file
   ```

   ```{tip}
   Each `*.values.yaml` file is a Zero to JupyterHub configuration, and you can customize whatever you like.
   ```

   ```{seealso}
   During this process you will likely also need to configure an Authentication Provider for the hub.
   See [](enable-auth-provider) for steps on how to achieve this.
   ```


4. Then reference these files in a new entry under the `hubs` key in the cluster's `cluster.yaml` file.

   You can use the `deployer generate hub-asset` subcommand to generate the relevant entry to insert into cluster.yaml file.

   ```bash
   deployer generate hub-asset cluster-entry --cluster-name $CLUSTER_NAME --hub-name $HUB_NAME --hub-type $HELM_CHART_TYPE
   ```

   ```{warning}
   Please pay attention to all the fields that have been auto-generated for you by this command and change every one that doesn't match the community's requirements (custom domain or special naming requests) as the autogenerated entry is a general one that follows current 2i2c default practices when there are no special requests.
   ```
